# American Cream Drafts
## Origin
The American Cream Drafts came from very meager origin. The entire breed was based on a single mare from Story County, Iowa. Old Granny, a cream mare, was auctioned off in a sale in 1991. Her ancestry was unknown, but her shiny cream coat and amber eyes captured an audience. This line was not very popular it consisted of only a few local farmers; that is until the birth of a stallion called *Silver Lace*. Born in 1932 he was a great- great grandson of Old Granny. Silver Lace was a very impressive figure; standing sixteen hands tall and weighing a whopping **two thousand two hundred pounds**. He managed to spark an interest in this draft breed in counties surrounding Melbourne, Iowa. The American Cream Draft is the only draft breed that originated in the United States.

Clarence T. Rierson has a huge influence on the American Cream Drafts. He instantly fell in love with *Silver Lace* and purchased as many of his daughters as he could find. Clarence then went through and traced each of their pedigrees and recorded them. He chartered the American Cream Draft Horse Association in 1944 with twenty members and forty-four horses. In the original registry only two percent of the horses that were accepted came from lineage outside the Old Granny line. By the time Clarence’s death in 1957 the association consisted of almost two hundred horses and a hand full of members. Sadly the registry was inactive from the late 1950’s until 1981. But in 1982 three families who preserved their lines of American Cream Drafts got together and reactivated the registry. 

## Association Regulations
The requirement for acceptance into the American Cream Draft Horse Association was the horse must have a cream coat, amber or hazel eyes, pink skin, and a white mane and tail. They were crossed with Belgians, Percherons, and Shires to expand the limited gene pool. The association decided to allow registry of mares with a different color coat as long as she fit the remaining criteria, because they would still throw foals with the cream coat. These mares are called “tracking mares”. However, the registry has always required stallions to have a cream coat and meet all of the criteria. The average height of the American Cream Draft is sixteen point three hands tall, but they can range anywhere from fifteen to sixteen point eight hands tall. Like other drafts these animals have a sturdy build, a large square head, and tend to have shorter legs. American Cream Drafts weigh around fifteen-hundred to two-thousand pounds. The tail is always left undocked. The cream color is foundational for the breed, and comes from the “champagne” gene. It is responsible for a number of rare coat colors in horses. The gene does not move the location of the pigment producing cells, but simply works as a diluter. These horses are known to be diligent works with a very docile disposition. The American Cream Drafts are very social animals and love to spend time with their owner. All draft breeds tend to consume large amounts of food, no surprise since they are huge, but compared to other draft breeds the American Cream Drafts are relatively easy keepers and do pretty well just grazing in a pasture. 

## All Drafts
All the draft breeds started dropping in numbers at an alarming rate around 1892, when the tractor was invented. Tractors have taken the place of horses in the fields. The Great Depression also put a strain on the horse population in the United States. American Cream Draft horse has never been a breed with a large population. They were considered a critical breed, because fewer than five hundred animals were found in existence worldwide until 2013. According to a horse nation article in 2016 the breed went from critical to threatened (less than five thousand), because the total population increased to two-thousand. This line is rumored to have started in the early 1900’s, so it is still considered a relatively new breed.  Today there are nearly three-thousand horses in the registry. That may not sound like much, but it is progress nonetheless.

## Drafts Today
Today American Cream Drafts are working horses. They pull wagons, carts, plows, mowing machines, and many other things. Some are used on hobby farms to plow field and cut hay. Some can even be found working in a forest pulling logs. While others are found in parades, since their extraordinary cream coats and amber eyes attract and audience. These horses also make decent riding stock; their docile temperament make them well suited for trail rides. I would not consider this a flashy breed, but they get the job done and have fun doing it. These horses can range in price from fifteen-hundred to ten-thousand dollars. The price is dependent upon the age of the animal and its skill set. Many people have never even heard of the American Cream Drafts! However, this breed is starting to make a name for its self through the hard work and dedication of the American Cream Draft Horse Association and its breeders. Their headquarters is located in Bennington, Vermont. The president of the association is John Schwartzler accompanied by Wendell Lipkes as the vice president. 

In conclusion, the American Cream Drafts came from a single mare and have steadily grown in numbers and population over the years; thanks to the hard work and dedication of the breeders. Even though this breed does not have a bearing in any country other than the United States, these gentle giants captured the hearts of many with their dreamy eyes and shiny cream coat. Not only are they gorgeous, but they also know how to get a job done. An American Cream Draft would be a great breed for a beginner looking to get involved in the draft horse community. 


[Work Cited

1.	http://www.horsenation.com/2013/08/31/10-rarest-horse-breeds/
2.  https://livestockconservancy.org/index.php/heritage/internal/americancream  
3.	http://www.merequusequine.org/cream-history/  
4.	https://www.karinabrez.com/blog/2017/6/4/american-cream-draft-horse-origin-and-characteristics
5.	http://www.theequinest.com/breeds/american-cream-draft/
6.	http://www.walkerfarms.org/
